Have you heard of the, I think it's a Japanese and Chinese game, strategy game Go, it's called
Go. Yeah. I mean, it's so hard when you first play it. I mean, it's this huge wooden board and I bought
this like $100 set because I saw it on an anime that I was watching and I was like, I'm going to
learn how to play that. And what was funny is I only had, you know, I only had Kara to play with.
So we both learned it at the same time. We both watched a couple of tutorials on like strategies
and the basic rules and stuff. And she was immediately so much better than I was that
I was so confused. Like she, she beat me literally 20 times in a row. And I was like, I mean, I,
guess my brain just doesn't morph to this game in the same way that hers does. Cause she was
immediately congealed to it and was like dominating me every single game. And, but the more you play
though, then I was like, Oh, this is what she's doing. And this is, these are the strategies that
she's seeing. And I eventually beat her and she got extremely pissed and we haven't played since
then. But, uh, so the record is 20 to one. Exactly. It's like, honestly, that is a marriage.
Like what the hell you just described a marriage. I mean, that's hilarious. Yeah. That's I, I mean,
I share that with you, Nate. Like I, I really, like, I always want to get better for me. It's less
about beating people though for me and more just getting better at the thing. Like that's always been
driving force. Like, you know, in whatever kind of game or whatever else that I play, like even the,
the theory world, it's not, it's not like, Oh, I want to be better than, you know, Diane or Thomas.
It's like, no, I want to get better at this, you know, like, and, and I don't always know exactly
what that means, but you know, you know, I mean, there's something cool about being able to recognize
patterns that you hadn't seen before. And that, that instantly like, Oh, there's three possible moves
out of this. This is the risk of that one. This is the risk of that. Just to be able to perceive that
differently in that way is so much, so pleasurable for me. Yeah. You know, I, I'll give an example for
me. I had, as when I had started playing golf and really up until the last year or so putting was
always very difficult for me because the really nice thing about golf is you just know your, you know,
your yardage, you know, the elevation and you know, the wind and you pick the club that goes that
distance. Right. And you, you execute your swing. And of course there's all kinds of problems with
executing your swing, but you don't have to gauge the distance. You just hit the club and it will go
that distance. If you know all those things and do them right and whatever, whatever, but not true
with putting. Putting is like, you know, and I always felt so confused by putting because I can't,
I don't know what it means to hit a 30 foot putt versus an eight foot putt. Like I don't
understand what that means. And what changed for me two years ago is I started just trusting my body.
It was a huge thing of like, when I step up to this putt, I'm going to look at the hole and I'm
going to take some practice swings and my body is going to decide how hard to hit it. And I mean,
I made a conscious decision to do that, to allow that and not be in my head all the time of like,
well, I don't know how hard to hit it. I, you know, what's the difference between this,
that distance and that distance. And I've become so much of a better putter where just saying like,
my body's going to know, and it's right most of the time. I'm getting wrong sometimes,
but it's right most of the time. So I will outsource that to my body.
So here's my segue is to think about the relationship of our instincts to analysis and institutions.
And, you know, I mean, I think one of the things that Heidegger is dealing with here, especially with,
with Nietzsche is like the institutions are no longer facilitate or driven by instincts and,
and, and will, and they've sort of become more like the stabilizing ground for the last man to,
to subsist rather than, you know, transcend or being driven. But in the,
the way that you're talking about, you know, the, the, your golf game,
I'm thinking about the relationship between, you know, there's a certain dichotomy. Like I'm
either in my head doing the analysis, overriding my instincts, or I'm trusting my instincts. And,
you know, the path, there seemed to be, you know, it doesn't seem like an open terrain between the
two, but there seems to be a number of pathways between instincts and, and analytics to the point
where I could imagine, you know, those analytic moves becoming so second nature, that they become
your instincts. Yeah. That's why I don't like the word, I don't, that's why I don't like the word
Instincts. I mean, something like feel versus analysis, but that analysis also certainly has a
feel to it. And I also, I mean, I really do very much think, like, I'm kind of getting to this point
now, where my feel is, I feel, I'm so confident in my feel, that I'm beginning to analyze how,
what are the different ways in which I feel this, right? And what are the different, different things
that produce the kind of feel that I want? And I don't experience any contradiction between those
two things. It's like, it's still a feel shot. It's not an analytic shot, like 110 yards in the
fairways, an analytic shot for me, it's still a feel shot. But nevertheless, like, so, and there's a way in
which even that analytic shot is like, well, this feels like the 110 yard swing, and this is a little
more like the 105 yard swing, whatever the hell that means, right? Like, and you see, like, when you
watch the pros, they have, the difference between 107 yards and 108 yards is a different feel for them.
Like, that they have so precisely calibrated senses of the intersection of the analytic and the sort of
feel stuff, right? Um, I mean, that's where, like, I'm not at that, I mean, I'm nowhere near that kind
of level or anything like that. But still, it's like, it, I don't like the dichotomy either. And,
um, and it doesn't feel... And even to say the analytics are only engaging with, you know,
the abstracted... I mean, you can abstract those instinctive feels, as you, as you said, like,
all right, you know, I've got these feelings, I'm going to diagnose them. You know,
this one's pushing me in this direction. Right. This one feels more or less icky when I think this
is a 115 yard shot. Right. Right. Which I know it's a 115 yard shot, but something in my body's
telling me, eh, not with the way, you know, something else is happening here. And that does,
I mean, that does happen. Those are really interesting moments on the golf course where
it's like everything about my cognitive analysis of the shot tells me that this is what I should be
doing, but this just doesn't feel right. You know, it doesn't feel like what I should be doing.
And, you know, it depends which do you go with, because you're often, you are faced with choices,
right? Like, do this or do that. And I don't think that I have a conclusion yet as to which
is the better one to go with. Um, but yeah, that's why I don't think it's, I don't feel like it's
instincts at all because it's years of playing. And particularly for me, the last year and a half
of playing a shitload, right? Like that, that it's not, I mean, unless we say instincts are things
that are generated or produced or created, fabricated, that would be the only way that I'd be comfortable
calling it instincts. Cause I certainly didn't just have them. You know, like, I mean, again,
to go to Nietzsche or even Aristotle, you know, I mean, I, I, I always love Aristotle on this. It's
like, you know, he's like, Oh yeah, your nature and then you have your second nature and the
distinction between nature and second nature doesn't seem to be particularly it's like, okay,
you've got the ones that you start off with, but even the ones you start off with, it's not like
they weren't made, right? It's not like they were descended, you know, like there's not a, again,
there's not a transcendental principle that is holding them fast. It's like, well, you know,
they, everything is the difference between us, uh, an analytic, a secondary nature and a primary
nature are not of matter of kind, but, uh, sort of like a matter of settledness or like, uh,
habituation relative. Yeah. Habituation. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, in the, in the context we're
talking about, like that kind of habituation is for the most part, a good thing. You're
developing a repertoire and if you internalize it, then it becomes the feel rather than simply
analytic. And then you can employ that feel on the course or in any sport or whatever for
Heidegger, at least in the context of these few lectures, it seems like that kind of habituation
is the bad thing, right? It's, it's last man becoming too familiar with himself and not being
able to kind of articulate the, the bad things about him, the representational thinking. So it's
like internalizing those kinds, that repertoire for Heidegger, although it seems like it has a bunch
of good, you know, outcomes as well. I mean, in terms of like the progress of human being,
that is sort of the enemy in these few chapters, right? That, that repertoire that we've developed
is the bad guy. Uh, not, not the good thing. Well, it's the settling of, of it that seems to be
the bad guy. And is that, I mean, well, let's just quickly, you know, Nietzsche uses the language of
instinct all the time. And I do think that the way that he's using instinct is pretty much always in
that, um, you know, kind of a routinization. How many times does he talk about how many, you know,
the whole transvaluation of values is in many ways also a transvaluation of instincts. Like,
all right, what, what were the conditions of possibility for the human to have the instincts
that they have? And, you know, what is the value of these instincts and, you know, what do they
overcome themselves into? Right. And, and it was like, at least the way Heidegger is taking up
the problem with the last man is that the last man wants to make last or to finalize a particular set
of instincts that are superior to, you know, the old ones that have replaced it. So the, you know,
the analytic, you know, the all-too-human analytic replaces the all-too-bestial, you know, animal
instincts. Right. And then like creates the conditions of possibility for a kind of human
to subsist, but not transist. I don't know what the word would be there.
It's content with that one phase-shift from the animal to the rational, like in, in the one section
and he kind of, it was a little bit odd, but the way Heidegger phrases it is that the, and this
seemed very Hegelian in the vulgar sense that we have not accessed like the, the truth of the truth
or the wholeness of the whole, you know, that, that to me is the, the problem. I mean, when we did
this last time and we can pull some clips from that is like this, this is the, the chunks that
we read this time remind me why I don't like Heidegger, that there's such a preciousness to
his authentic relationship to what being should be or what Nietzsche really is. And he is just so
committed, um, to, to that sensibility, right? Even if it is a kind of pluralism, which it is at
times like that interpretation stuff is just like, look, the true nature of meaning is a plurality of
meanings. And it's like, well, then why does that the fucking true nature? Like why you don't need
the, the sort of the terminology of grounds that he just is insistent upon or, or that recur in all
these places. Like you can critique other versions of Nietzsche without having to say that you are
genuinely getting in touch with his thought and allowing his thought to fall away or whatever,
you know, like, right. But there is such, such an insistence or recurrence of an insistence on truth.
Yeah. Right. Correctness. That's unnecessary.
I agree. I, again, I still go so back and forth with it. Sometimes I'm totally on your side,
John. It's like, how do you, like this, you know, you seem to be so incredibly confident in the right
and in the accessing, you know, the, you know, the, the real meaning of this or that, or the real
essence of, of this and that. It's not even just that there is one, but your confidence that you've,
that you've found it, which is, yeah, which is incredibly frustrating. But again, there are,
he always is introducing these wrinkles that's like, ah, what, oh, wait, oh, you, you kind of,
you know, have a rug there that I'm slipping out from underneath, but I don't exactly know where
it's taking me. And so we read lectures five, six, and seven for today. And, you know, five is,
is kind of, uh, focusing on, um, uh, uh, finding and losing Nietzsche. I mean, they're all kind of
focused on Nietzsche. Yeah. But, um, it's this lecture six was the longest one. And I think the
one that we gave the most attention to, and, you know, it says, and it's in the passages about the
overman, uh, or the superman that I think kind of strike at this dynamic the most where he's like,
and we talked about this, this, um, already, but in many ways, you know, part of what's going on here,
at least to me, seems to be Heidegger's response to his association with the Nazis. And he wants to
disavow a certain form of, uh, Nietzsche scholarship that thinks of the superman as sort of like the
quantitatively better version of what we have. And, you know, he wants to like, look, there's this
vulgarization of, of Nietzsche. And we just can't look at it like this. In other words, like, hey,
Nazis, you, you, not only are you not the superman, but which, which by the way, I mean, let me just
interject there. Like I so fully agree with the critical dimension of that thing. Yeah. But then to turn
around and claim, I have the real true one is the, it's just replicating the problem, right? Like
that, that to me, the problem is the kind of dogmatic conviction of, uh, that anyone has access
to that thing. And, and again, it just seems unnecessary to me. Like you don't have to do
that. You can say, Hey, look, there's this version of Nietzsche out there that presents the superman
as this quantitatively, you know, superior one, but you know, here are some of the problems with that.
But here's another version, right? Like here's another version that is just as Nietzschean,
right? It's not like I'm just making this shit up. I'm pulling it from, I can show why,
you know, you get this from Nietzsche. So I don't know why you have to have, in fact,
I just don't think you do unless you're setting yourself up as a priest. And he is, it doesn't,
I mean, again, it's a complex form of priesthood, but he's still, he's still like bought into that
lineage of philosopher in which the philosopher is the one who knows the truth. And it's like,
I just find that even as he complicates it in really interesting and compelling ways,
his stuff on reading in chapter seven, I think there's lots of really good stuff there. Like,
what is it, you know, what to do, what you need to do in order to read a philosopher and to hear a
philosopher and whatever else, you know, and then contrasted with what we said last time about his,
his etymology of the, then he blinks passage, right? And you just go, dude, right? Like,
again, so authoritatively positing a thoughtful and smart and interesting, but also strained and,
you know, out there etymology that, again, you could make a case for it, but he just so like,
Totally. Yeah. Here's what it is, right? Yeah. Blinking, blinking comes to mean deception. And
you're like, really? Blinking means deception? Like, again, it's not an, a total random association,
but it's an unusual one. Right. Yeah. Right. Like the idea of blinking as a tell or something,
of course, it's, it's not a, it's not, but he's like this, I mean, what is his phrasing there?
It's like, this word is related etymologically to another word. It's like, so what? Right. Right.
What word is not related etymologically to whatever the hell you want it to do? Six pathways of etymological,
you know, separation can get you pretty much anywhere. Right. And, and, but, you know,
we know that because we're involved with language enough and have done that. So the fact of something,
it's one thing to say, this word derives historically from this other word, but to say,
it's related to, come on. Right. Well, I totally agree. I mean, like, I, again,
I see the pathway that it actually seems incredibly related to, um, truth and lies in a non-moral
sense where like, I mean, in many ways he's talking about the Apollonian is that, you know,
the, I mean, the blinking here is this glittering deception that's going to create form from the
chaos. And we all know it's a hoax, but we're all going to agree that it's the truth. And after
such and such a time, we think that it's the truth. And this actually the full add up, like the,
to fully adopt that, you know, the blink is the truth is the last man that, you know, this human
creation is not a human creation. It is the case. It's so like, I, I mean, when I read those passages
in Nietzsche, I have a much simpler take on the blink. Like, what does the last man do? He looks at
love. He looks at the universe. He looks at these other things. He blinks. In other words, like,
they're not all that impressive to him because he knows what they are. Right. Right. Right. Or he thinks,
he thinks he knows what they are. He's no longer astonished and he's no longer, I mean, the last
man, just in sort of my reading, the last man is the one, and Nietzsche defines it this way,
the one who just doesn't care to overcome himself. Right. Right. Humanity has been defined in its
process as its own self-overcome. Like, here's what makes the human human, is that it transforms the
human all the time. I mean, that's a recurring line on Nietzsche's, like, we are a species that tortures
ourselves incessantly through history, the amount of blood that has been spilled to produce all of
this. You know, like, this is what we do as a species. This is an extraordinary thing. The last
man is the end point, which is like, eh, yeah, why bother torturing ourselves? Right. Why bother
causing ourselves pain? And again, I don't necessarily want to claim that that's the right reading.
I think that it lends itself towards other kinds of thoughts that are interesting. And that's,
frankly, I mean, you know, he has the thing about losing Nietzsche, right? Like, losing Nietzsche.
Now, what does it mean to sort of, to get Nietzsche and then to lose him? Very ambiguously phrased. But one
of the phrasings of losing Nietzsche is to set it free. Right now, again, not sure exactly what he means
by freedom, but my version via Deleuze would be, like, to play it through other things, right?
Right. You want to find the truth of Nietzsche, deploy it in some other context and make it do
something else. There is a sense that the losing Nietzsche for Heidegger also is a kind of more
permanent sense of losing him. Like, like, not just, not just ingratiating yourself in his thinking or,
like, finding his rhythm of thinking and going with it. I think because he maybe wrongly assigns,
like, a metaphysical way of thinking to Nietzsche, like, he's the, what does he say? He's, like,
the last great, the last metaphysician. I think Heidegger is invested in not just passing through
Nietzsche and inhabiting his thought, but eventually surpass, like, exceeding it. And what, I mean,
again, I do think, however, that Heidegger's, like, employment of Nietzsche here, I mean,
is so clearly influential in the kind of post-structuralist movement. So the treatment
itself must have been taken directly for people like Foucault and Deleuze, etc. But like you said,
like, the treatment of him in some ways, would you call it a vulgarization of Nietzsche? Not at all
points, but, like, in the kind of diagnosis of him as a metaphysician. Because to me, like,
he's clearly not a metaphysician in that, in that vulgar sense. But...
These are, those are the moments for me, and even in his Nietzsche lectures, like, look, he is,
he thinks Nietzsche is incredibly important and a profound sort of intellect and profound thinker. So
it's not, but, but he also thinks that he has surpassed, I mean, I agree with you, for instance. Like,
I'll point to one passage that really struck me in terms of the, and this is, I think, a much deeper
question in terms of Heidegger's tone or Heidegger's general approach to things, but it's the
question of, you know, his relationship to this common sense thing that is the problem, right? Like
the, the, the sort of platitude function and all of that, that way of thinking of thinking is the
problem. And that he associates with the tradition. And, and he says, when he talks about his relationship
to the tradition, and this is where you got to give him credit, he says, our own way derived, this is on
page 55, where he says, our own way derives from such thinking, right? The representational
thinking. So it's like, he's not simply claiming to be outside. And so you give him props for that. He
recognizes that he's embedded in the metaphysics, et cetera, et cetera. But he says, so right after that,
he says, our own way derives from such thinking. It therefore remains necessarily bound to a dialogue
with traditional thinking. And I think a dialogue, a dialogue positions interlocutors want as separate
from one another. It's not a dialogue, right? And if you think of it, and I do think he, I do think he
thinks of it as a dialogue, which is he's having a dialogue with the tradition, which would position
him at some level, yes, in a conversation, but also outside of the position of tradition, as opposed to
saying, I'm like, I think of Derrida's version of this as being incredibly different, which is, I am only in
the tradition, trying to push it in other directions from inside of it, right? And recognizing that I
can't get out, that there's no dialogue going on for Derrida in that regard. And not just for the
Gadamerian reasons, you know, but, and I do think that that to me is a symptom of that, if you think of
yourself in dialogue with conventional thinking, as necessarily in dialogue, that's a big deal, that
matters, but it's, it's just one kind of move. There's a different kind of move that, that would see
itself as fully and completely immersed in. Yeah. And constituted by conventional thinking, and yet not
wanting to simply replicate. Right. Right. And, and struggling to figure out how to not simply replicate
it, despite the fact that I'm not in dialogue with it, I'm immersed in it. That's a different
disposition. Yeah. So, so Heidegger, you could say that Heidegger, here and there at least, adopts
kind of a meta position where he wants to get on top of the, he wants to get on top of the entire
philosophical spectrum and be able to say, this is the right way. This is the path out. It's the
philosopher. I mean, what philosopher have you read that does not see themselves as surpassing all
previous philosophy. Right. Yeah. But, but I mean, like you said, people like Derrida at least try to
situate themselves rather than, they would at least acknowledge that everyone's a product of, of
traditional representational thinking, of their epoch, of their image of thought in Deleuze's terms,
right? You are, you are absolutely situated. You, you can't just transcend your contents and look
down upon it from above. Um, but I, I mean, to be fair, there are plenty of moments in Derrida where
I see that very similar kind of move of like, I am not that and I don't want to be doing, you know,
and, and their moment, but like, you know, his critical moments towards Austin in the Signature
Van Context or towards Levi Strauss in the Structure, Sign, and Play moment. Like, you know,
it's not, that's why to me, for instance, that's why I take on the terminology of style. That's the
really, one of the really big things that appeals to me is because what I can say in this case is
I'm not being any less metaphysical than any of the people that I'm writing about. It's just my style
Of doing metaphysics is different. And so there's not, it's, it's not a question. I mean, what style
gives you in that regard is because it's not really important or it has not historically been seen as
really important is that it's not really a substantive deviation, right? It is only a dispositional
inclination and the only becomes a positive quality, right? Like the, so there's a, I mean, I'd hate to
say a humility associated with it, but what, you know, because I mean, Jesus associating me with
humility seems ridiculous, but it's, it's one of the things that I feel like style buys me is,
it's just, it's just talking about different ways of inhabiting the same moves, right? The same
metaphysical. So the reason I would hesitate to call Heidegger more metaphysical, although Derrida does
that, right? Like that's what makes, Heidegger's calling Nietzsche the last metaphysician is what
makes Heidegger the last, but I would hesitate to do that simply because it sort of implies that I'm no
longer in metaphysics, the one who's doing the naming of that person as a metaphysician, right?
And it's like, of course you are, right? Of course. And absolutely 100%, not 99.9 and you figured out a
0.1% way out. You absolutely fully immersed 100%. That doesn't mean that every way of being immersed 100%
is the same thing. Yeah. Right? So we are talking about disposition styles like within the content
that we're calling metaphysics. I like that line to say that, you know, only here is to say I'm only
doing metaphysics or there's only a way of doing metaphysics as a positive quality that, you know,
as the idiosyncrasy that now remakes how metaphysics works. Yeah. You know, not over an overarching
metaphysics, but like pushes it or tweaks it in this or that direction. I think it's also... I found
that passage, by the way, that, you know, this is one of those, there are two passages I kind of want
to look at. The first one, we were talking about the problem with fixing Nietzsche and that Heidegger
seems to both proclaim and then undercut. This is on 51, is after he was talking about for like the
umpteenth time that that line, the wasteland grows. That's your, that's your favorite, your favorite line,
right? Um, so this is on 51, maybe like 10 lines down. Um, what if he had known that he himself had to be a
precursor, a transition pointing before and behind, leading and rebuffing, and therefore everywhere
ambiguous, even in the manner, uh, and in the, in the sense of the transition. All thoughtful thought
argues that this is so, as Nietzsche himself knew and often put into enigmatic words. This is why every
thoughtful converse with him is constantly carried into other dimensions. This is also why all formulas
and labels fail in a special sense and fall silent in the face of Nietzsche's thoughts. And, you know,
there he seems to be saying that the attempt to formalize, the attempt to fix, the attempt to find
the right, Nietzsche misses what is possible or what, what the power of Nietzsche's writing, which is
not determinative, but is a carrying away. And any thoughtful engagement with Nietzsche's thinking is
going to carry you away into other dimensions. And so it's like the first move is to find Nietzsche the
capacity to thoughtfully engage. And the second one is to lose Nietzsche as a fixed determinant position
and to, you know, follow along with that thinking into arenas that may or may not seem all that,
you know, Nietzschean. Right. You can, you can do that. It's just that there's a couple of problems
there with his, with what he does, because he, he thinks in this case, first of all, that Nietzsche is
special in that regard, right? Like that, that, you know, and, and many of the philosophers are special
and that they are warranting, like his, the Plato references, they warrant this kind of polysemousness
in ways that other things don't seem to warrant it, right? Like that's why common sense is a problem.
Like the TGI menu. The TGI Fridays menu.
Right. Exactly. Um, so, so it's like, there's a specialness to the thinking of philosophers that
enables this kind of move, uh, that it seems to me the whole baseline for the problem is set against
why philosophers are not articulators of common sense and why we need to read them against common
sense as, as, as opposed to saying common sense doesn't function as common sense. Right. Yeah.
Right. It doesn't actually work in this or propositional logic doesn't actually work. I mean,
that's why like what you're doing in terms of Plato is to me really interesting because it's like,
it's saying something different. Propositional logic doesn't function as propositional logic.
Right. Like it's not saying, oh, there's this thing other than propositional logic that could be,
you know, um, and, and so, I mean, that's, that's one of the ways in which it kind of recuperates
the moves and also the, the mover was like, he is the one who's deciding what gets to count as the
thoughtful thought and, uh, um, and, and not others. Right. Or, or to, uh, kind of dismissiveness
towards all of the readings of Nietzsche. Again, with which in part, I'm entirely sympathetic,
but not because those thinkers haven't gotten to the true essence of Nietzsche, just because of,
I mean, even a kind of consequentialist framework is just because they're, they're thinking in
response to that, it just doesn't push thinking. Yeah. It doesn't care to, it just wants to get
Nietzsche right. You know, whatever that right is, whatever that thing is. And it's like, well,
Heidegger's, Heidegger's version is much more movement and movement oriented and dynamic and not
static, but it still thinks it's right. Right. It still thinks that movement is the movement of
thinking is the truth of Nietzsche. Right. Right. It's like, well, why not just be like, look,
the movement of thinking is a different orientation into reading Nietzsche, you know, period. Right. Like,
and it is, um, that offers other kinds of thinking possibilities. Yeah. You know, to approach it this
way generates different kinds of things. You just don't need it to be like, well, Nietzsche was the
one who discovered it. And we have to find it. You just don't need all of the, this, all of those
dynamics of, uh, a very kind of traditional version of essence, you know, that are very familiar. And
this is like, I mean, this is not the 19th century that he's writing. This is the 1950s, right? Like,
I mean, it's not like that discourse isn't available to Heidegger. Right. Yeah. You know,
except for that he's already Heidegger now, you know? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, but what makes,
what makes Nietzsche exceptional for Heidegger though, is not that he's, that Nietzsche is able to
like explicitly, you know, or in some, you know, outstanding way write about his times. It's that
he's diagnostic of the problems of his, of his times and that the sort of unthought, right? Which
is what he, he uses in one of the later lectures, the unthought thread in Nietzsche is what's so
truly important about him. And then that he kind of articulates that horizon of being through the
over man that gives us something else, right? Something else to, to latch on to rather than
simply just lying in the, the simplicity of traditional metaphysical or representational
thing. That's where like in, in my terminology, I would say the content of what Heidegger does
with Nietzsche, I'm totally down with, right? Like I, I, I really do like the directions. It's just how
he, how he gets there. It, and sometimes it's not always the case, but sometimes, but how,
I also realized, I mean, I was thinking about this right before we came on, is the extent to which
people like us, we have relationships with books, right? It's not, we don't read them, right? We have
relationships and those relate, like all relationships, like your marriage, like your guys' sort of
romantic relationships, they shift from day to day. You're going to have a day where like she's
irritating as fuck and the next day she's amazing or what, you know, like that's how a relationship,
it's not a progression towards increased intimacy. It's a shifting of different kinds of intimacies.
And I think like, you know, when I was sat down to reread this, I, I was like, okay, I'm in a kind
of cranky mood and I'm not in the sort of slow, careful, remember, I think it was, I don't remember
if it was last time or two times ago where I was like reading Heidegger was so helpful to me because
it just, it settled me. Like it was hard. It was difficult. It was like row, you know, going out and
rowing for 40 minutes before I finally realized that I was on the water. It was, you know, it was work,
but it was good. It was productive work. Whereas this time I was just like, oh, this is just fucking
irritating. Like not because I wanted him to get to the point, just because I'm just so tired of a
certain kind of, for me, the word precious just kept coming up. Like this precious relationship to
thinking or to Nietzsche or to the Superman that others just don't seem to appreciate that. There
is such a, that, that, that quality that just kind of, you know, my relationship with him, you know,
we're having a bad day, right? It's not date night. I get that. But I also like, since I've been reading
some Foucault and we've obviously read Deleuze's What Is Philosophy, the extent to which Nietzsche is
the figure as a kind of launching pad for a route out of dialectics, out of metaphysics, out of
representational thinking. Heidegger prefigures that, I mean, not that long before them, but enough
before them. Foucault's making the same arguments. He's like, listen, Nietzsche is basically the only
figure. The guy. And for Deleuze, it's the same thing. Like, how do we get out of this type of
thinking? And now none of them are going to say he provides an answer. They're going to continually
say that it's a horizon for maybe a potential transfiguration of human being. And Heidegger
basically says that too. He's not, he doesn't exactly say I have the answers. He's saying that
the answer might be contained here. And if we can, if we really press on it, you know, we might get there.
Yeah. No, I think you're right. It's interesting because in my graduate class, I decided for
next week that I was going to do the class on Nietzsche, Nietzsche, Freud, and Marx, right?
Those sort of the hermeneutics of suspicion type of stuff. And I was beginning to think about what I
might lecture on. And that's the thing that kept coming back to me is there's a way in which Marx
and Freud think that they've figured something out, whereas Nietzsche doesn't, right? Like,
in the sense of understanding, like life is will to power is to me structurally really different than
historical materialism or psychoanalysis, like structurally. It's not simply that they have
different contents or whatever, that there's, there is a kind of like, hey, shit happens and then more
shit happens and then other shit happens. Sensibility to Nietzsche, who of course is just as polemical as
the other folks, right? And can be just as dismissive, except for that there are also passages
that undermine the polemics and the dismissiveness. That again, you can just miss those or ignore those
or disregard those things, but I just, they're just not as prevalent in most other thinkers. That's the
thing that to me is, hey, if you're going to write dismissive polemics, you've got to at some point
dismiss the dismissiveness too, right? Like you have to do that kind of move if you want to do, if you want to
follow in that, that kind of line of thinking.
You got me thinking about Heidegger's preciousness because I, I totally agree, right? He, I mean,
everything wants to be slowed down and made a bit more delicate and, you know, I, I don't want the
clumsy and to be, and to be clear, like, right, like to be clear, I, that appeals to me at times, but
yeah, sorry. No, I, I get that. And I, but I'm, I'm thinking about it in relationship to Heidegger's
own diagnostic of Nietzsche's shout with to, you know, also see something quite, uh, um, uh, complex,
but, you know, I'm thinking just a little bit more about the historical context of each of those
thinkers and, like, Nietzsche's, like, rage, rage or indignation against a kind of complacency and
belief in progress. Um, whereas Heidegger post-World War II is dealing with sort of like the, the, the,
the twin horns of an existential dread on the one hand after, like, I mean, a complete, like, lack of
faith in the Enlightenment and in progress, uh, an intellectual level, but then also an incredible
clumsiness of, you know, a newly dominant America and sort of, like, belief in a kind of normalizing,
normatizing power of, of, you know, cultural tropes. And in both cases, you can just imagine him
reacting against a kind of brute clumsiness and, you know, like, a little preciousness, a little
delicacy, a little slowing down. Yeah, makes sense. And he describes the Superman that way, too. Like,
like, if the Superman had characteristics, he's actually slower than the last man. He's more
considerate, you know, he's, he's more economical with his speech. Attentive. Yeah, yeah, more attentive.
Yeah. Which I thought was kind of like, because that's a, that almost seems like a reach. I mean,
it makes sense. But when he talks about the, the Superman being qualitatively, not quantitatively
different from the human or the last man, it's like, well, then how do you have just these
characteristics available to describe him? How do you know he's more economical with his speech?
Yeah. Right. You know, but. Yeah. And I get that he does it. So like, there, there are moments like
this where I'm, as someone, you know, who spent a lot of time reading Nietzsche, and this is on 59,
he says, where he's, he's making the kind of distinctions that he makes several times, which is
the Superman is not the person who's the great politician. It's not the like highly visible,
successful person. Right. And he says, but, but Nietzsche doesn't mean a type of existing man,
only super, super, super dimensional, nor does he mean a type of man who casts off humanity to make
sheer caprice the law and titanic rage the rule. And I'm like, really? Are you sure of that? Because
I think there are a lot of places where you could say making sheer caprice of law is exactly what he's
talking about. Yeah. Right. And titanic rage as the rule is exactly what he's talking about. Like,
I don't think that that's right. I don't think that Nietzsche is really doing that. But to sort of
say it so as sort of dismissively, like he doesn't mean this, it's like, ah, I'm not so sure that he
doesn't mean that. I'm not sure that a sheer caprice of law is simply antithetical to Nietzschean
Thinking. Right. Like this sort of disregard, I mean, think of it in the genealogy of morals,
the man who is the, the figurehead. Now, this isn't the overman, and I understand that. But like,
the man who is the pinnacle, the individual who is a true individual, meaning not beholden to morality,
not beholden to law, not beholden, like is not constituted by that. And it's an impossible
thing, of course. But that person is so, like, talk about the caprice in relation to law. That's
exactly what he is. Yeah. Yeah. Right? It's like, I don't give a shit about this thing. This is so
irrelevant to me as to be, you know, beneath me. Yeah. Right. We're not even fuck the herd, like I
don't, like, I don't. Who cares about the herd? Yeah. Yeah. Right? Who cares about sort of the day-to-day
operations? Like, I mean, and this is, by the way, this is something that I don't like in Nietzsche.
Right? Like, that reading is very available. Yeah. You know, which is just someone who could come
along and say, who cares if we exterminate, you know, millions of people in the interest of
overcoming? Like, I don't give a shit about the deaths of millions. Right. Like, that is available
as a reading of the Nietzsche and Superman. It's not just wrong. At least to me, there's just too
many places where that dynamic, the sort of disregard. I mean, think about even the stuff
Heidegger quotes in here in terms of the institution building. Right. I was just going to turn there.
We've lost the courage of institution buildings. Institutions, you know, if you really want to
have a good institution, you have to not give a fuck about the happiness or welfare of human
beings for centuries. Yeah. That does not sound like a careful, attentive, gentle overman.
And again, I'm not saying that's a version of the overman that I want to champion either. You guys
know, you've heard my version of Deleuze, you know, the overman is futurity. Right. But I'm well
aware that that version is one version. Yeah. But it is an interesting question of like the function
of the institution in relationship to the human. That's right. You know, I mean, I would imagine
which is really what he's asking in that passage. Yeah. And I would imagine that all three of us
are far more inclined toward a kind of institution amenable to the last man. Like, right. We want our
institutions to be relatively democratic and, you know, egalitarian. It's like they are supposed to
protect the people and allow for a safe harbor. Allow us to be individuals. Or at least pretend to be
individuals. Right. I mean, it's like that individualism seems to be the disease for
for Nietzsche. It felt like in that one part about like Russia or whatever, it was, it seemed almost
proto Marxist, like the, we need to actually give way to authority. The fear of authority is the disease of
individualist democracy. But yeah, I mean, like, you know, Nietzsche's anti liberalism is, you know, you can find
instances of all over the place. All over the place. But you know, I think it's important that, you know, Nietzsche's writing about a,
you know, a pre Soviet Russia in that, you know, like, you know, but that Russia has, you know, and I love the phrase where it's like, you know, that Russia can wait, that Russia can
has endurance. Yeah. Has, has endurance that, that, but it seems to be tied to a certain kind of, of suffering for the sake of a transformation or as a movement. Like, you know, the institution isn't for the stability of the people. The institution is for the sake of the transformation of, like, of a people into something.
Well, that's right. And that's, so that's, that's, that's important. You have to, you don't have to, but you, to me, you have to add in to his critique of those, or to his interest in that sort of authoritarian quality, that the telos of authoritarianism is not just a new person
having power, right? That the, the telos is the transformation of the species itself away from a certain kind of human, a traditional human. And so that's the problem with real authoritarianism, right? Is that real authoritarianism is simply, for the most part, just about privileging certain kinds of preexisting versions of success, well-being, et cetera, and just putting certain people in those positions at the behest, at the expense of many others.
So, yes. So, yes. Can one complicate Nietzsche's authoritarianism? Yes. And does Nietzsche point the way to do so? Absolutely.
Um, but you can't simply dismiss the authoritarianism either, right? Right. So, I mean, it's kind of like, you were using the terminology, and I quite like this, the, the, the loudness and the quietness, right, like, that Heidegger brings up. Like, sometimes you've got to just make loud noises, and sometimes you've got to be quiet. It's almost like Heidegger's just being loud about being quiet. Right? Like, he has to proclaim, like, I'm the fucking, well, he's just, like, screaming to us all, like, I'm the quiet.
Like, silent one. It's like, then shut up about it, right? Yeah, that's funny.
Well, but the other thing with the institutions as well is, I wonder, this institution of the last man, I wonder how conceivable it even is. You know, you think about democratically oriented, you know, sustainability oriented institutions, and I just don't, I'm not convinced that those aren't themselves authoritarian and transformative in their authoritarianism.
Yeah. Yeah, I mean, it's a way more complicated question. I mean, there's, there's no doubt about it. And Nietzsche's relationship to democracy, which, as you said, I mean, it's very easy to find a million places in Nietzsche's writing where democracy is the sign of mediocrity, right? It is, what democracy indicates is the championing of a kind of mediocrity.
Nietzsche's, what are the conditions, right, what are the conditions, right, what are the social conditions that can produce the occasional extraordinary individual? And one that champions mediocrity is not it. Whereas one that champions a kind of oppression is better at that.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Not because of the oppression, right? Not for the sake of the oppression, but because oppression seems to be the conditions in which people respond.
Yeah. Right. Yeah. Like, our lives are too easy. Yeah. You know? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, it's like the cultivation of the last man. I mean, you could argue that, and I'm sure Nietzsche would still, that we are still in the age of the last man.
And I don't even really know what it would mean to be in the age of the Superman either, because then, like, that would be almost too transformative. It would be somehow chaotic, you know, that it would.
Everything hinges on what you mean by the overman. Right. And I think he's quite right about that. It's like, if the overman, again, that's why the answer of futurity as a perpetual state is the only satisfying answer.
You can't ever cross a threshold into the world.
Well, it seems like you need both. I mean, it is kind of, it sets itself up as a binary, but you need the threshold, and you're only ever on that threshold, right?
I mean, Heidegger says it here somewhere, that you can only define the last man in relation to the Superman.
So, which was kind of odd to me, because I was like, you'd think you'd be able to define the last man on his own terms, but no, you can only define him in relation to the potential, you know, for transformation.
So, you're going to be able to define the last man on his own terms, but you can only define the last man on his own terms.